---
title: Train to teach in England
related_content:
  - name: "Initial teacher training (ITT): criteria and supporting advice"
    link: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/initial-teacher-training-criteria/initial-teacher-training-itt-criteria-and-supporting-advice
  - name: Find postgraduate teacher training courses
    link: https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses
  - name: Apply for teacher training in England
    link: https://www.gov.uk/apply-for-teacher-training
  - name: Teacher training funding
    link: https://www.gov.uk/teacher-training-funding
  - name: "Early years initial teacher training: 2020 to 2021 funding guidance"
    link: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/early-years-initial-teacher-training-2020-to-2021-funding-guidance
  - name: "Qualified teacher status (QTS): qualify to teach in England"
    link: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/qualified-teacher-status-qts
---

Contents

* A markdown unordered list which will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents header" from above
{:toc}

## What you’ll need to work as a teacher

To work as a qualified teacher in state schools in England, you’ll need
Qualified Teacher Status (QTS).

QTS allows you to teach as a qualified teacher in state-maintained
schools and non-maintained special schools in England. It may also allow
you to teach in other parts of the UK.

There is information available about teaching in [Northern
Ireland](https://www.education-ni.gov.uk/articles/initial-teacher-education-courses-northern-ireland),
[Scotland](https://teachinscotland.scot/) and
[Wales](https://www.discoverteaching.wales/routes-into-teaching/).

Undergraduate teacher training leading to QTS can take up to 4 years.

Graduate teacher training leading to QTS typically takes one year of
full-time study. Some providers offer part-time study, which typically
take 2 years.

Once you’ve gained your QTS, you can apply for jobs as a newly-qualified
teacher (NQT).

NQTs do a further 'induction programme' in school as a paid and
qualified teacher, which allows them to build on their initial teacher
training.

<div class="call-to-action">

<p>Find <a href="https://www.ucas.com/teaching-option/undergraduate-initial-teacher-training">undergraduate teacher training courses</a>.</p>

<p>Find <a href="https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses">postgraduate teacher training courses</a>.</p>

</div>



### Assessment only (candidates already working in school)

If you’re an unqualified teacher with 2 years’ experience, you can be
assessed over a maximum of 12 weeks to gain Qualified Teacher Status
(QTS).

Although you may not need to take a formal teacher training course, you
must meet the eligibility requirements for teacher training - which
includes a degree, and GCSEs (or a standard equivalent) in English,
maths, and science for primary school teaching.

## Gaining Qualified Teacher Status

### PGCE with QTS

A PGCE (postgraduate certificate in education) with QTS gives you an
academic qualification as well as QTS. Many PGCE courses include credits
that count towards a Master’s degree.

A PGCE may allow you to teach in some other countries. If you’re
planning to teach overseas, you should always check what’s needed in the
country you’d like to teach in.

### PGDE with QTS

Some providers offer a PGDE (postgraduate diploma in education) with
QTS. In some cases these courses offer more credits towards a Master’s
degree than PGCE courses.

#### Further education (PGCE or PGDE without QTS)

To teach further education you do not need QTS. Instead you can study
for a PGCE or PGDE without QTS. These courses are also eligible for
candidates without a degree.

### Find postgraduate teacher training

All primary and secondary teacher training courses on [Find postgraduate
teacher training
courses](https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses)
lead to QTS.

Use [Find postgraduate teacher training
courses](https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses)
to search and compare government-approved teacher training providers in
your area.

You can also search for ‘further education’ courses leading to a
post-compulsory education and training qualification (PCET). You do not
need a degree to apply for courses leading to a PCET.

## Salaried teacher training courses

Under some circumstances, you can train as a teacher ‘on the job’. On
these courses, you will:

  - earn a salary
  - pay no student fees for training towards QTS

There are 3 options available:

  - School Direct (salaried)
  - Postgraduate teaching apprenticeships
  - High Potential Initial Teacher Training Programme

On these courses you’ll be paid and taxed as an unqualified teacher. The
salary awarded will differ between schools – you should check the salary
with the school before you apply.

These courses do not offer bursaries, scholarships or student finance.
There are usually no course fees to pay.

Both School Direct (salaried) and postgraduate apprenticeship courses
will lead to QTS. If you choose to do a postgraduate teaching
apprenticeship, you’ll also have to sit an ‘end point assessment’ (EPA).

Select ‘only salaried courses’ in [Find postgraduate teacher
training](https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses)
to find local courses.

## Types of teacher training provider

You can do your teacher training on a course run by a university, an
individual school, or a partnership of schools (sometimes called a
SCITT, standing for ‘school-centred initial teacher training’).

Although the type of institution (school or university) running the
course will differ, the content of the course will meet national
guidelines on teacher training.

The primary and secondary teacher training courses listed on
[Find postgraduate teacher training](https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses)
all lead to QTS or PGCE/PGDE plus QTS.

The majority of postgraduate teacher training courses are made up of:

  - academic study of the theory of teaching (also known as ‘pedagogy’)
  - hands-on experience in the classroom

The course typically lasts a year (3 school terms) and training will
usually take place:

  - at your training provider's main site
  - in school placements organised by your provider

Details of course structure and location will vary between training
providers – you can research specific courses on [Find postgraduate
teacher training](https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses).

When you’re researching training providers, bear in mind:

  - location – you will need to be able to travel to your academic
    learning location as well as your placement schools
  - reputation – check Ofsted’s report on your training provider for
    more detail
  - competition for entry – some providers are tougher than others
  - special academic requirements for entry – check the training
    provider listing in [Find postgraduate teacher training](https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses)
    to see what class of degree, for example, the provider asks for
  - size of institution – would you be happier in a large university
    campus, or in a smaller local school setting?

You can use [Find postgraduate teacher
training](https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses)
to find and compare a shortlist of training providers located near to
you.

## Things to consider before you apply

### Choose an age group

You can train to teach:

  - under-fives (also known as ‘early years’)
  - primary school children
  - primary school with a specialism (for example, English, modern
    languages or science)
  - secondary school age children (you’ll need to specialise in a
    subject)
  - further education (14 to adult)

Use [Find postgraduate teacher training](https://www.find-postgraduate-teacher-training.service.gov.uk/start/subject?l=2)
to see the full list of options.

Or you could arrange to spend time in school to [get experience of different age groups.](https://schoolexperience.education.gov.uk/)

### Teaching under-fives

If you choose to teach under-fives, you’ll need to apply for a
specialist teacher training course called Early Years Initial Teacher
Training (EYITT).

At the end of the course, you’ll gain Early Years Teacher Status and
will be qualified to teach under-fives only.

<div class="application-notice info-notice" role="note" aria-label="Information">
  <p>
    Please note these courses do not lead to Qualified Teacher Status (QTS).
  </p>
</div>

[Browse a list of training providers offering Early Years Teacher
Training](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/early-years-initial-teacher-training-itt-providers-and-school-direct-early-years-lead-organisations/early-years-initial-teacher-training-itt-providers-and-school-direct-lead-organisations)

EYITT courses are eligible for bursaries, scholarships and student
finance. Some are also salaried.

Undergraduate courses:

  - take 3 to 4 years of full-time study and lead to a degree in an
    early
  - have tuition fee loans available from [Student Finance England (SFE)](https://www.gov.uk/student-finance).

Graduate entry courses:

  - typically take one year of full-time study
  - provide a £7,000 grant to cover course fees
  - offer bursaries for graduates up to £5,000 for a first class degree

Graduate employment-based courses:

  - are one year part-time courses for graduates working in early years
    settings who need further training to demonstrate the Teachers’
    Standards (Early Years)
  - offer funding of £14,000 to cover up to £7,000 fees and £7,000
    contribution to employer costs

Assessment Only is:

  - self-funded
  - maximum of 3 months duration
  - ideal for graduates with experience of working with children from
    birth age to 5, who meet the Teachers’ Standards (Early Years) and
    have no need for further training

### Choose a subject

[View a list of secondary school teaching
subjects](https://www.find-postgraduate-teacher-training.service.gov.uk/start/subject?l=2)

When you apply for teacher training, you’ll be asked to give detailed
evidence for the knowledge and interest you bring to the subject(s)
you’d like to teach.

Evidence can include:

  - the subject of your undergraduate degree
  - modules you studied as part of your degree
  - postgraduate degrees (for example, a Masters or PhD)
  - your A level subjects
  - expertise you’ve gained at work

## Subject knowledge enhancement (SKE) courses

SKE courses are intended to help you enhance your knowledge so that
you're able to teach a subject.

Your training provider will identify if you need to take one as part of
their selection process, usually at interview.

They will ask you to complete an SKE course as a condition of taking up
your offer of a teacher training place if they feel you need to enhance
your subject knowledge.

SKE courses are usually available if:

  - your degree isn't in your chosen subject
  - you studied the subject at A level but not degree level
  - you have an unrelated degree, but relevant professional experience
    in the subject

SKE courses can also be helpful if it’s been a while since you studied
for your degree.

<div class="application-notice info-notice" role="note" aria-label="Information">
  <p>
    Please note that SKE courses for candidates starting Initial Teacher
    Training (ITT) in 2021/22 will not be available at the start of the
    recruitment cycle from 1 October 2020.
  </p>

  <p>
    We will confirm the approach to SKEs following completion of the
    government's Spending Review.
  </p>

  <p>
    ITT providers will be able to offer a teacher training place under the
    condition of completing an SKE course, but you won't be able to start
    one until funding and eligibility are confirmed after the Spending
    Review has been completed.
  </p>

  <p>
    You should note that a conditional offer does not guarantee a funded SKE
    course will be available in your chosen subject.
  </p>
</div>

You won't have to pay for your SKE course and you may be eligible for a
bursary.

Your training provider will decide the course duration (between 8 and 28
weeks). This will depend on the knowledge you need.

SKE courses can be completed before or, in some cases, alongside your
teacher training. They are available to study full-time or part-time,
classroom-based or online.

SKE courses are usually available in:

  - biology
  - chemistry
  - computer studies
  - design and technology
  - English
  - geography
  - languages
  - maths
  - physics
  - primary maths
  - religious education

The SKE directory sets out what courses are provided and will be updated
once we have confirmed the approach to SKE courses for academic year
2020/21

If you’re concerned about your subject knowledge, discuss it with your
potential training providers.

## Training to teach if you have a disability

Teachers with disabilities make valuable contributions both to
classrooms and the culture of schools where they work.

#### Your rights

It is against the law for teacher training providers to discriminate
against teacher training candidates with disabilities. Under the
Equality Act 2010, providers must make adjustments to help you do a
course or go to an interview, providing your requests are reasonable.
Examples of support could be:

  - organising equipment like a hearing loop or an adapted keyboard
  - putting you in touch with support staff if you have a mental health
    condition
  - making sure classrooms are wheelchair accessible

If the help you need is not covered by your provider making adjustments,
you might also be able to get support from [Access to
Work](https://www.gov.uk/access-to-work). This could include a grant to
help cover the costs of practical support in the workplace.

#### Telling your training provider about your disability when you apply

It’s up to you if you want to tell your training provider about your
disability.

information you give about your disability is protected under the [Data
Protection Act
2018](https://www.gov.uk/data-protection/the-data-protection-act).

#### Completing a fitness questionnaire

If you’re offered a place on a teacher training course, you may have to
complete a fitness questionnaire before starting. Training providers
should only ask relevant questions to make sure you’re able to teach.

#### Useful resources for disabled candidates

[Get funding help if you're a student with a learning difficulty, health
problem or
disability](https://www.gov.uk/disabled-students-allowances-dsas)

[The Equality and Human Rights Commission
(EHRC)](http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en) for information about
discrimination on the grounds of disablity.

[AbilityNet](http://www.abilitynet.org.uk/) for advice on the use of
computers and communication technology for disabled people.

[Disability Rights
UK](http://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/adjustments-disabled-students) for
advice on adjustments for disabled students while studying.

## High potential candidates, career changers and researchers

### High Potential ITT

[Teach First](https://www.teachfirst.org.uk/) is a charity which runs
the government-funded High Potential Initial Teacher Training programme
(ITT). You’ll need to have a 2:1 degree or higher to apply for a
place on the programme, currently delivered by Teach First. You’ll
train over 2 years by learning on the job, paid as an unqualified
teacher and you will not pay tuition fees.

You’ll be placed into a school straight away and gain QTS in your first
year and complete your Newly Qualified Teacher placement in year 2.
You’ll also receive leadership training, which includes a fully-funded
Postgraduate Diploma in Education and Leadership (PGDE), worth double
the credits of a PGCE.

### Career Changers

The Career Changers programme aims to attract high calibre graduates who
have had a successful professional career with significant experience in
their field into teaching roles and schools where they are needed most.

It provides help and guidance with the transition from a previous career
into teaching.

Career changers can add value to teaching with:

  - previous employment experience
  - industry knowledge
  - wider perspectives into teaching practice and school policies

[Now Teach (NT)](https://nowteach.org.uk/) and
[Transition to Teach (TT)](https://www.transitiontoteach.co.uk/) are
bespoke teacher recruitment and retention programmes developed exclusively to
support career changers, providing transitional support and additional
mentoring so that successful career changers can get the most out of their
transition to teaching.

### Researchers in Schools (candidates with a doctorate)

Researchers in Schools, which includes the Maths and Physics Chairs
programme, is a tailored, teacher training and professional development
course for high-calibre candidates.

The programme is designed to run over 3 years, and offers both a
salaried and bursary route into teacher training depending on your prior
experiences and circumstances.

To [apply to this teacher training
programme](https://researchersinschools.org/), you'll need (or be about
to finish) a doctorate in one of the following subjects:

  - physics
  - mathematics
  - chemistry
  - biology
  - engineering
  - computing
  - English
  - history
  - classics (Latin or Greek)
  - modern foreign languages (French, German or Spanish)

## Teaching children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND)

Use [Find postgraduate teacher
training](https://www.gov.uk/find-postgraduate-teacher-training-courses)
to search for training courses that involve working with SEND children.

Qualified SEND teachers are eligible for an extra payment, on top of
their annual salary, of between £2,209 and £4,359 a year.

#### Teaching SEND pupils

You don’t have to take a SEND specialist course. If you want to be a
SEND teacher you can apply to teach in a special school if you have:

  - been teaching for a few years
  - experience of managing SEND pupils in your primary or secondary
    school

#### Teaching children with sensory impairments

If you want to teach pupils with hearing, vision or multi-sensory
impairments, you’ll need a specific qualification.

#### Be a Special Educational Needs Coordinator (SENCo)

As a SENCo you’ll be responsible for assessing, planning and monitoring
the progress of children with SEND. To apply for a job as a SENCo,
you’ll need to:

  - be a qualified teacher
  - complete the National Award in Special Educational Needs
    Coordination (NASENCO) when you take up the SENCO post

## Get a job in teaching

You can find teaching jobs by searching the Department for Education’s
[Teaching Vacancies](https://teaching-vacancies.service.gov.uk/)
service.

The service is used by 70% of state schools in England. Search by
location, subject, job title and salary and set up job alerts.

## Contact and support

<div class="call-to-action">

<p>Talk to us between 8.30am and 5pm, Monday to Friday about teaching or teacher training.  </p>
  <p><a class="gem-c-button govuk-button" data-module="govuk-button" href="/#talk-to-us">Chat online</a></p>
  <p>Alternatively, call Freephone 0800 389 2501 or email: <a href="mailto:getintoteaching.helpdesk@education.gov.uk">getintoteaching.helpdesk@education.gov.uk</a></p>
</div>

### Find an event near you

[Get Into Teaching’s nationwide events](events) are informal
opportunities for you to get free expert advice about your next steps
into teaching.
